---
title: This is a New Page
type: page
weight: 604
---
# On Pierre Huyghe:
# Opening Remarks

## Pavel S. Pyś
### Curator of Visual Art, Walker Art Center
### Nasher Prize Graduate Symposium Moderator

In looking back across Pierre Huyghe’s practice, it might seem odd to bestow upon him a prestigious sculpture prize, let alone consider Huyghe a sculptor. His work made between the early and late 1990s employed the vocabulary of cinema – casting, acting, and editing – and manifested via moving image, writing, photographs, and posters to explore punctures in narrative, confluences of times and places, and the slippery boundary between reality and fiction. In these early works, Huyghe drew on the history of film,

a medium he has called an open and “public space”[^1] that is up for grabs, reconsideration, and renegotiation. Huyghe achieved such marvelous slippages in works such as Les Inciviles (1995) and L’Ellipse (1998). In Les Inciviles, he considers Pierpaolo Pasolini’s Uccellacci e uccellini [Hawks and Sparrows] (1966), retracing places where the work was originally shot, together with Ninetto Davoli, an actor who had appeared in the actual film. The resulting work is not a juxtaposition of old and new, but at once an ambiguous blend of Pasolini’s film that we all share in our cultural memory, as well as a new work, what appears to be some form of documentary or filmic sketch or study. Without a strict script, Les Inciviles is not a remake, but a work that prods at and skirts around what a remake might be. Today’s paper by Emilie Walsh will explore the relationship between fact and fiction in relation to Huyghe’s video works, considering storytelling, and documenting space and time.

What then of materiality, objecthood, the stuff of sculpture, and Huyghe’s relationship to the medium? Important shifts in terms of the artist’s spatial process and approach occur with the following projects: Mobil TV (1995/98), Le Proces du Temps Libre at the Vienna Secession (1999), the expanded and multi-platform No Ghost Just a Shell collaboration (1999), and Le Château de Turing, at the Venice

Biennale in 2001. In these instances, Huyghe, along with peers, among others Philippe Parreno, Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster, and Liam Gillick, pays acute attention to the process of not just making but presenting, as he calls it, the very “protocols of an exhibition,”[^2] the rules that govern the act of presentation. It is hard to refer to these as “exhibitions,” as this term conventionally signifies a start and an endpoint, a fixed site, and likely a rather static situation – all of which Huyghe’s projects resist and decidedly do not conform to, instead celebrating malleability and porousness.

While important markers, these moments are not dramatic breaks in Huyghe’s practice. Their roots lie in his earliest projects – Chantier Permanent (1993) and The Association of Freed Time (1995). Chantier Permanent translates as “permanent construction site,” a project for which the artist travelled with a Domus magazine photographer to document unfinished buildings in the Mediterranean. In a state of becoming, Huyghe saw the buildings as offering the possibility that architectural space (and ultimately what traditionally frames sculpture) need not be fixed, but could be perpetually unfinished, unfolding and changing. Speaking of the project, Huyghe has said it “establishes an open present,”[^3] where incidents can occur. This forms an attitude and philosophy, by which the very notion of practical and functional space is placed under scrutiny. This extends to Huyghe’s approach to architecture as a site of change – in Moving Gates (2006) two doors sail and dance through the gallery; during Streamside Day Follies (presented at the Dia Art Foundation in New York in 2003) walls converge to create a temporary “pavilion” space for the viewing of a moving image work; while in On/Off (2001) and Show as Exhibition (2007) architectural space is activated via electric light.

The Association of Freed Time is the officially registered association that Huyghe created with fellow artists Maurizio Cattelan, Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster, Carsten Höller, Liam Gillick, Philippe Parreno, and Rirkrit Tiravanija, as a result of the Moral Maze exhibition organized at Le Consortium, Dijon in 1995.

The association questioned the distinction between “work” and “leisure” time, idleness and productivity, transforming the duration of the exhibition into a departure point for other projects. For Huyghe, the collaboration forged a “vibrating temporality,”[^4] a temporality of like-minded artists who resist the strict, fixed parameters of exhibiting and making. Rebecca Starr’s paper today will address The Association of Freed Time in relation to leisure, inactivity, and resistance to work, while Noni Brynjolson will speak to themes of celebrations, conviviality, social order, and participation through the lens of Streamside Day.

And so back to sculpture. Huyghe has turned to the most elemental of materials: snow, ice, rain, mist, and fog to create objects and situations that change over time, or make themselves present, and then pass, and then return again. He has employed an odd, spine-tingling, and stomach-churning array of fauna: ants, bees, anemones, spiders, hermit crabs, blind cave fish, an active flu virus, tadpoles, each beyond the artist’s control – living, copulating, susceptible to disease and death. Huyghe has created micro-ecologies such as aquaria called Zoodrams, as well as Untilled at documenta 13 in 2012 – a compost area combining architectural elements, a reclining figure covered in a bee’s nest, marijuana, and psychotropic plants. Today, Pietro Scammacca’s paper Baroque Bifurcations and Organisms will touch upon many of these agents, in relation to the affinity between matter and life, and sculptural temporality. Huyghe has invoked the sculptural vocabulary of figurative statuary, teased at notions of monumentality, and plunged into time immemorial in works such as the video De-extinction (2014), in which he studies a copulating pair of insects preserved 30 million years ago in amber. Huyghe has enlisted these materials to examine the distinction between the natural and man-made, horological and natural time, and the divide between animal and human, while addressing themes of mortality and death, matter and decay. As Ursula Ströbele’s paper Concepts of Nature in Sculpture Today will explore, traditional sculptural qualities of permanence, durability, fixity, stasis, weight, and solidity fall short of fully capturing Huyghe’s engagement with objecthood. His sculptures are choreographed, scored, and staged, rather than placed, positioned, or moved. Having to borrow from the language of dance, theater, and music to describe Huyghe’s sculptures illustrates just how limited and clunky sculpture’s terminology can be. With Chantier Permanent and The Association of Freed Time in mind, we see that in Huyghe’s hands, sculpture’s borders are punctured, its rules are bent, sculpture is made temporary, unfolding, changing, and fragile.

Today we celebrate Pierre’s practice and the many ways it has expanded the possibilities of not only sculpture, but of what art can be. I thank Pierre for his uncontainable, shifting, elusive, and hard-to-define practice, and the Nasher Sculpture Center for hosting the first in what I hope will be many scholarly dialogues surrounding Nasher Prize laureates.

## Notes

[^1]: Huyghe quoted in George Baker and Pierre Huyghe, “An Interview with Pierre Huyghe,” October 110 (Fall 2004): 96.
[^2]: Ibid, 81.
[^3]: Huyghe in Liam Gillick, Philippe Parreno, and Pierre Huyghe, The Trial (Munich: Kunstverein Munich, 2000).
[^4]: Baker and Huyghe, “An Interview with Pierre Huyghe,” 88.
